saga batching sample (#5720)
Particular/docs.particular.net: samples/saga/batching/sample.md

---
title: Batch messages using Saga
summary: Use batching when generating tasks using Saga
reviewed: 2022-04-09
component: Core
related:
- nservicebus/sagas
---

## Introduction

> This sample shows how to control the task (work) generation via batching of the work items through Sagas.

Reviewer: 1. Its missing why someone would want to do this.
2. Its missing alternatives. Like, do processing on an isolated endpoint or even a [sending work items to a specific endpoint instance](https://docs.particular.net/nservicebus/messaging/routing#make-instance-uniquely-addressable) where this endpoint could have a specific lower concurrency or even [processing rate limit](https://github.com/ramonsmits/NServiceBus.RateLimiter).
3. The example isn't stating how to do the paging.
4. A drawback of this solution is that not all work items are processed as fast as possible but I guess that is the whole reason for this overhead to throttle?
5. As critical time can no longer be used to validate to "peek" workload it might be worth stating that it likely is very good idea to capture the time delta between saga start and completion to track how long this "batch operation" takes in total and emit this via a metric framework.
6. An orchestration like alternative could also be based on a routing slip to achieve sequential atomic work item processing without the saga overhead IO to significantly reduced wasted IO and latency.

Author: I have updated, and hopefully addressed points 1, 2, and 5. Regarding the other points:

3. The sample is abstract to show the concept. The paging depends on the type of work that needs to be generated.
4. All generated work items are processed as fast as possible. If multiple work items are causing messages to generate, that'd cause massive queue backup which wouldn't happen with this pattern (since we only generate them gradually). E.g. Customers A and B and C generate 3 work tasks. If we generate 10,000 messages per customer, the first customer coming in would cause massive delays for customers B and C.
5. Correct. A feature such as a sequence diagram (if it could show the whole picture) or an activity view via open telemetry is a better fit for distributed systems to show / measure end-to-end time. 
6. Do we have a sample to point to as another alternative?

Reviewer: > 6\. Do we have a sample to point to as another alternative?

We have a routing slip sample: https://docs.particular.net/samples/routing-slips/

Author: Thanks, added.

When processing the `StartProcessing` message each saga instance creates `ProcessWorkOrder` in batches of 100 messages (in each batch) and sends them off to the `WorkProcessor` endpoint to handle. Once all the messages of a batch is completed, the next batch of messages are generated.

The output to the console of the `WorkGenerator` will be:

```
Started.
Press 'S' to start a new process or [Enter] to exit.
SStarted process 'cc39af80-d33c-45e0-9991-5ece40cf7d6b' with '473' work orders.
Processing saga started: 'cc39af80-d33c-45e0-9991-5ece40cf7d6b'
Starting the process for '473' work orders.
Queueing next batch of work orders: (1 - 100).
Queueing next batch of work orders: (101 - 200).
Queueing next batch of work orders: (201 - 300).
Queueing next batch of work orders: (301 - 400).
Queueing next batch of work orders: (401 - 473).
All done. Took 33.737792
```

The output to the console of the `WorkProcessor` will be:

```
Started.
Press [Enter] to exit.
Processing work order '1'
Processing work order '4'
Processing work order '10'
Processing work order '2'
...
Processing work order '431'
Processing work order '427'
Processing work order '441'
Processing work order '420'
```

> Note that while the work requests are generated in sequence, on the processing side the work can happen out of order. 

Reviewer: One of the drawbacks that I think need to be documented is. What when one or more item fails processing? That would result in the 'paged processing' to fail.

I think it would be good to keep in mind that 'paged processing' should not fail due to non-transient errors and that the invoked handler ensures a "Reply"

Author: I think this would cover that:

>The saga controls the generation of the next batch of work and monitors for the completion signal of all messages in that batch, before starting the next batch.

it wouldn't necessarily fail the paged processing but would stall it and won't move to the subsequent page. If that is not desired, the worker process can send a different kind of 'reply' that contains error info. In other words, this is a basic structure without being too prescriptive as that'd be different based on business requirements.

Reviewer: I understand, but I do think its important to highlight issues that could cause harm if not dealt with during the design. I added a suggestion.

---
title: Batch messages using Saga
summary: Use batching when generating tasks using Saga
reviewed: 2022-04-09
component: Core
related:
- nservicebus/sagas
---

## Introduction

This sample shows how to control the task (work) generation via batching of the work items through Sagas. This pattern of throttled message generation can be helpful when the the rate of generation needs to be controlled:

- When lots of messages are generated as part of an incoming message, the amount of messages can further delay other messages in the same queue.
- When the work as a whole is completed only when all messages are processed. If all messages are generated upfront and the work is considered 'cancelled' or 'failed', generated messages that are already in the queue would still have to be processed (e.g. no-op).

> Alternativly to avoid congesting the queue, messages can be generated and routed to a [specific endpoint](https://docs.particular.net/nservicebus/messaging/routing#make-instance-uniquely-addressable) (endpoint per work type), or [lower the concurrency rate](https://docs.particular.net/nservicebus/operations/tuning#configuring-concurrency-limit) to have the messages processed one by one.

Reviewer: Concurrency limit is different from processing rate.
```suggestion
Alternatively to avoid congesting the queue, messages can be generated and routed to a [specific endpoint](https://docs.particular.net/nservicebus/messaging/routing#make-instance-uniquely-addressable) (endpoint per work type), or [lower the concurrency limit](https://docs.particular.net/nservicebus/operations/tuning#configuring-concurrency-limit) to have the messages processed sequentially.
```

SStarted process 'cc39af80-d33c-45e0-9991-5ece40cf7d6b' with '473' work orders.
Processing saga started: 'cc39af80-d33c-45e0-9991-5ece40cf7d6b'
Starting the process for '473' work orders.
Queueing next batch of work orders: (1 - 100).
Queueing next batch of work orders: (101 - 200).
Queueing next batch of work orders: (201 - 300).
Queueing next batch of work orders: (301 - 400).
Queueing next batch of work orders: (401 - 473).
All done. Took 33.737792
```

The output to the console of the `WorkProcessor` will be:

```
Started.
Press [Enter] to exit.
Processing work order '1'
Processing work order '4'
Processing work order '10'
Processing work order '2'
...
Processing work order '431'
Processing work order '427'
Processing work order '441'
Processing work order '420'
```

Notice that while the work requests are generated in sequence, on the processing side the work can happen out of order. The total time it took the process to finish is also logged.

NOTE: Metrics such as Critical Time may not be sufficient to monitor how long the end-to-end process takes. This is something to note and measure to ensure quality of service.

## The Saga

> The saga controls the generation of the next batch of work and monitors for the completion signal of all messages in that batch, before starting the next batch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The saga controls the generation of the next batch of work and monitors for the completion signal of all messages in that batch, before starting the next batch. Very long running work items or failed work items could unintentionally stall the subsequent work items. Consider using saga timeouts and or work item failure responses to mitigate this if required.
```

This sample shows how to control the task (work) generation via batching of the work items through Sagas. This pattern of throttled message generation can be helpful when the the rate of generation needs to be controlled:

> - When lots of messages are generated as part of an incoming message, the amount of messages can further delay other messages in the same queue.

Reviewer: This isn't really true as the total number of workitems is identical. I think the essence here is that this allows for interleaved processing of very large batches of work items

Maybe it even helps if this is visualised:

Sequential batches due to batches generated massive amounts workitems at start
 
| A       | B       | C       |
|---------|---------|---------|
| 100.000 |         |         |
|         | 100.000 |         |
|         |         | 100.000 |

Paging workitems via saga:

| A      | B      | C      |
|--------|--------|--------|
| 25.000 |        |        |
|        | 25.000 |        |
|        |        | 25.000 |
| 25.000 |        |        |
|        | 25.000 |        |
|        |        | 25.000 |
| 25.000 |        |        |
|        | 25.000 |        |
|        |        | 25.000 |
| 25.000 |        |        |
|        | 25.000 |        |
|        |        | 25.000 |

Author: That's true. I think some visualization will help.

Author: @ramonsmits added a mermaid diagram, please see if it captures this.
